Effects how far gnomes will travel for better food and drink
Remove floor and mine section below into stairs
Gnomoria is a sandbox management game and is 
played by indirectly controlling your gnomes 
by creating jobs for them, designating areas 
of the world as specific places and adjusting 
settings. You can pause and unpause the game 
at anytime to manage your kingdom and watch 
Each gnome needs to eat, drink and sleep and 
it's your job to help provide for them. As you 
build your kingdom, your overall worth will 
increase, attracting more gnomes to join you as 
well as enemies who threaten your gnomes. 
Your only objective is to help your gnomes 
survive in this harsh world for as long as 
Gnomoria takes place in a randomly generated 
3D world with many resources to discover and 
The world is split into a 3D grid of cells and is 
fully deformable. Each cell can be harvested 
for its resource and used to be rebuilt 
elsewhere or crafted into new items. 
Gnomes in a Squad behave based on that 
Squad's Formation. Every Squad can be set to 
use the same Formation or a new Formation can 
Formations are made up of 5 Positions which 
are defined in the Positions window. These 
Positions can be the same or different. 
Positions tell individual Squad Members how to 
behave while the Formation tells the Squad what 
There are 3 basic Formation options which 
Perform attack orders - With this option set, 
gnomes will seek out and fight enemies that you 
Defend gnomes - Formations with this option 
will automatically track down and fight enemies 
that are engaged in combat with other gnomes. 
Avoid enemies - This option changes the Squads 
default behavior of attacking enemies on 
sight, to avoiding any enemy in sight. 
Positions have a Uniform, which tells the Squad 
Member what they are allowed to equip when 
they are in this Position. There are also a few 
Pursue lost targets - If line of sight to the 
current target is lost, Squad Members will move 
Maintain distance - Squad Members will attempt 
to stay at maximum weapon range from their 
Retreat if bleeding - Squad Members will 
disengage from combat to heal bleeding 
Assist Squad Leader - With this option set, 
Squad Members will always target the same 
enemy as their Squad Leader instead of 
Additionally, each Position can set a Perk 
which will give a unique bonus when certain 
A Uniform defines what a gnome is allowed to 
equip. Uniforms can be set to only equip 
specific items, materials or only items of a 
Additionally, each Formation can set a Perk 
which will give every Squad Member a unique 
bonus when certain conditions are met. 
When starting out, gnomes don't know anything 
about Mechanisms, however, gnomes love to 
Once a Tinker Bench has been constructed, 
gnomes with the Tinkering skill will get to work 
attaching gears to random objects, hammering 
things and eventually somehow, unlocking new 
Links are Mechanisms whose sole purpose is to 
Axles are straight line connections that can go 
horizontally or vertically. Horizontal axles 
can be built directly into the floor without 
Gearboxes allow axles to connect from 
different directions as well as intersect. 
Gearboxes are large and require the floor to 
be removed before it can be set in place. 
Toggle switches are a special kind of link that 
can connect or disconnect Mechanisms around 
it. The Lever can be manually flipped on or off 
and requires a gnome with the Mechanic skill to 
operate. Pressure Plates flip on or off when 
stepped on and can be set by a Mechanic to be 
Power Sources unsurprisingly provide power 
and are required for a mechanical system to 
operate. Some Power Sources are operated 
manually, while others are automatic or even 
Devices have different functions when 
powered or unpowered, such as moving a 
mechanical wall or opening and closing a hatch. 
Traps are a special kind of Mechanism that 
don't connect to other Mechanisms. Traps are 
self contained and all of their parts are 
When a trap is set, it already has the 
necessary power and parts to be triggered by 
an enemy. The catch, is that once it is 
triggered it requires a gnome with the Mechanic 
skill to reset it before it can be used again. 
Workshops are where your gnomes will go to 
craft new items. Each Workshop has its own set 
of recipes for crafting. Each recipe requires 
a skill to be used for crafting and only gnomes 
with that skill enabled will be allowed to craft 
When a gnome accepts the craft job, they will 
gather the required items and bring them to the 
Workshop to craft. Crafting jobs can be set to 
"Repeat" which will repeatedly craft the item 
as long as the requirements are met. Craft jobs 
can also be set to "Craft To" a specified 
number, and gnomes will automatically craft 
that item when the current quantity in stock is 
When creating Craft jobs at a workshop, 
specific materials can be selected per 
ingredient. The first ingredient in the recipe 
usually determines the material type of the 
newly crafted item. In some cases, such as 
crafting metal alloys or turning logs into coal, 
the newly crafted item will have a new material. 
An item's material is what determines its 
properties. For many items, this is primarily 
the color. Some items like tables and chairs, 
can be crafted from wood or stone and are 
visually different. The material also plays a 
part in determining the value of an item as well 
as combat related properties. For example, a 
gold statue will be more valuable than a silver 
statue and bronze armor is stronger than 
Terrain constructions add to the world and 
typically change how everything moves through 
the world. This includes building walls, floors, 
Walls block movement and floors provide 
something to stand on. Ramps and stairs both 
enable vertical travel in the world. A ramp 
requires a wall for support or it will collapse. 
Gnomes travel across ramps diagonally and 
require an adjacent floor at the top of the 
Stairs can be built free standing and require 
no additional support. Gnomes travel across 
stairs by directly moving up or down before 
continuing, thus making stairs slightly slower 
than ramps. However, since a gnome can stand 
on top of stairs, it allows them to reach 
otherwise innaccesible areas and build new 
Furniture are constructions that are typically 
used for decoration but can also serve a 
purpose. They can be used to boost the value 
of a room, or used directly such as beds, 
Most furniture are first crafted in a workshop 
and then placed in the world through the Build 
Storage constructions are special types of 
Furniture that can be used to store items. They 
can only be placed in a Stockpile and are 
automatically used when stocking items into 
Workshops are required to craft new items. 
Each Workshop has a set of recipes for 
crafting new items and are at the heart of 
The Stockpile designation is used to instruct 
your gnomes where to place items. A Stockpiles 
main setting is selecting which items are 
allowed to be placed in its area. Stockpiles are 
an important designation for managing a 
Gnomes with the Hauling skill enabled, will move 
allowed items to this Stockpile, provided there 
is room. Stockpiles have a Priority setting and 
higher priority (lower number) Stockpiles will 
be stocked before a lower priority (higher 
number). Stockpiles can also be renamed and 
temporarily Suspended so that gnomes ignore 
Normally, 1 item can be placed in each square 
until the Stockpile is full. Storage items, such 
as crates, barrels and bags, can be built on 
Stockpiles so that each square can hold 
The Farm designation is used to instruct your 
gnomes where to plant crops, such as wheat, 
strawberries and cotton. Farms must be 
designated over dirt. Each Farm is assigned a 
specific Crop and gnomes with the Farming skill 
enabled will work the Farm automatically. 
Your Farmers will begin by harvesting any 
crops that are ready. If there are no crops to 
harvest they will plant seeds on tilled soil. If 
there is no other work to be done on the Farm, 
your gnomes will till any remaining untilled soil. 
Farms have a Priority setting and higher 
priority (lower number) Farms will be worked 
before a lower priority (higher number). Farms 
can also be renamed and temporarily Suspended 
The Pasture designation is used to instruct 
your gnomes where to keep livestock, such as 
yaks, alpacas and emus. Pastures must be 
designated over grass. Each Pasture is 
assigned a specific animal and gnomes with the 
Animal Husbandry skill enabled will work the 
Pasture automatically. Each animal takes up 
space in the pasture and different types of 
animals have different space requirements. 
Your Ranchers will begin by herding unpastured 
animals into the Pasture. If there are no 
roaming livestock they will tend to the animals 
by sheering wool or milking them. Animals that 
share a Pasture will breed on their own. 
Pastures have a Priority setting and higher 
priority (lower number) Pastures will be worked 
before a lower priority (higher number). 
Pastures can also be renamed, temporarily 
Suspended so that gnomes ignore it and set a 
limit of males and females allowed. 
The Grove designation is used to instruct your 
gnomes where to plant trees. Groves must be 
designated over dirt. Each Grove is assigned a 
specific tree and gnomes will work the Grove 
Gnomes with the Horticulture skill enabled will 
start by planting tree clippings. Once a tree 
has grown, gnomes with the Horticulture skill 
will cut clippings to be used for growing more 
trees. Some trees, such as apples trees, can be 
harvested and Gnomes with the Farming skill will 
pick fruit on the trees. Finally, gnomes with 
Woodcutting will fell trees in your Grove. 
Each Grove job can be turned on or off to allow 
for specialization, such as a grove of apple 
trees that only allows fruit to be picked. 
Groves have a Priority setting and higher 
priority (lower number) Groves will be worked 
Groves can also be renamed and temporarily 
Suspended so that gnomes ignore it. 
Personal Quarters are where your gnomes will 
first look when they need sleep. A Personal 
Quarters will require a bed to be constructed 
If a gnome does not already have a Personal 
Quarter, they will automatically claim a vacant 
one as their own. You can also manually assign 
or reassign Personal Quarters as you see fit. 
Personal Quarters are unique in that the Worth 
of the room directly effects how well rested 
the gnome becomes. Each construction in the 
room adds its value to the rooms total value. 
The higher the room value, the better sleep the 
room provides and the longer a gnome can go 
A Dormitory is another room where gnomes will 
go when they need sleep. Unlike the Personal 
Quarters, a Dormitory cannot be assigned to a 
specific gnome and will be shared by all 
Provided that there is an available bed, gnomes 
without a Personal Quarters will sleep in a 
Dormitory. Unlike the Personal Quarters, the 
total Worth of the Dormitory has no effect on 
how well the gnome sleeps. However, sleeping in 
a bed is still prefered over sleeping on the 
Dining Rooms are used to designate where your 
gnomes are allowed to eat. Gnomes will look for 
an open chair that is next to a table and bring 
their food there to eat. If there are no 
available chairs, gnomes will stand and eat but 
One Dining Room can be selected to be the Great 
Hall. Gnomes without work will idle in the Great 
Hall and wait for something to do. Each 
construction in the Great Hall adds to its total 
Worth. The Worth of your Great Hall directly 
contributes to attracing wandering gnomads to 
The Hospital is where gnomes will go for healing 
or to get help eating and drinking. At one time, 
a Hospital can provide for as many gnomes as 
there are beds in it. Like other designations, 
Hospitals can have a Priority set as well as be 
Normally, gnomes will be able to heal themselves 
with bandages on their own. If a gnome has lost 
the use of both hands, or has a serious wound, 
they will go to a hospital bed and wait for a 
Doctor. Gnomes with the Medic skill enabled will 
bring bandages to the injured gnome and heal 
If a gnome has lost the use of both hands, they 
can no longer feed themselves. These gnomes 
will go to a hospital bed when they are hungry 
or thirsty. Gnomes with the Caretaking skill 
enabled will bring food or drink to these 
Guard Stations are designations that specify 
where a Military Squad should defend. Gnomes 
in the assigned Squad will roam through out the 
Guard Stations can be renamed to more easily 
Unlike other Designations, Patrol Routes are 
made up of a series of waypoints instead of 1 
large area. Like other Military Designations, a 
Squad is assigned to a Patrol Route and Patrol 
Gnomes in the assigned Squad will follow the 
Patrol Route from point to point. Upon reaching 
the end of the Patrol Route, they will turn 
around and follow the route in reverse. If the 
Loop option is selected, gnomes will instead 
move from the last point back to the first and 
Your gnomes will need food and drink to surive 
and rest to keep working hard. Gnomes will feed 
themselves, provided that there are food and 
drink in supply. Crafting more advanced food 
and drink provides increased nourishment for 
your gnomes -- meaning they can go longer 
without food or drink. Sometimes your gnomes 
will also craft higher quality food and drinks, 
which will also provide more nourishment than 
Eventually your gnomes will get tired and need 
to rest. Gnomes prefer to sleep in comfort over 
resting on the cold hard floor. However, if 
there aren't any beds available, they will rest 
their eyes for a few minutes anywhere they 
Gnomes take pride in their living space and 
prefer to have their own personal quarters in 
your kingdom. The more valuable the personal 
quarters is, the more at ease the gnome 
becomes resulting in better sleep. The quality 
of sleep a gnome gets will let them work for 
longer before needing to sleep again. Sleeping 
in a bed is better than the floor and sleeping in 
a nice personal room will provide better sleep 
Gnomes have different skill levels in many 
areas as well as general attributes which 
effect all skills. Each job has 1 skill 
associated with it as well as 1 or more 
attributes. When a gnome completes a job, they 
become more experienced in that skill and train 
their attributes. Higher skill levels allow 
Each gnome is assigned a profession. 
Professions can be shared among different 
gnomes or customized for each gnome. A 
profession is just a collection of which skills 
gnomes are allowed to use. If a job requires a 
skill that a gnome isn't allowed to use, then 
You can pan your view around the world with the 
keyboard (default WASD) as well as with the 
mouse by left or right clicking and dragging. 
You can also rotate between 4 viewing angles 
with the keyboard (default , and .). 
Gnomoria is a world with not just width and 
height but also depth. The current depth is 
displayed in the upper left corner of the 
screen. You can move the current depth up or 
down with the scroll wheel on your mouse or the 
Left clicking on the ground will display a list 
of everything at that position. Clicking on 
anything in that list will provide more 
Right clicking on some objects will bring up a 
menu for interacting with it. For example, right 
clicking on a Farm will show the Farm options 
and details about that Farm. Otherwise, right 
clicking will bring up an action menu for 
creating jobs and interacting with the world. 
The Kingdom menu shows overall information 
Here you will find the name of your kingdom, 
game difficulty and total Kingdom Worth. The 
World Seed is also displayed here and can be 
reused when creating a new world to generate 
There is also overall information about your 
workshops, farms, pastures and rooms. 
This is where you can see information about 
The first thing you'll see is a general overview 
of some necessities like total counts of food, 
drink, weapons and armor. The Stockpiles tab 
will list all stockpiles you've created and allow 
you to filter the list with the options on the 
Selecting items or categories on the left of the 
Items tab will display quantities of each item on 
the right as well as a break down of each item 
The Population menu provides detailed 
information about your gnomes and their 
The Overview tab displays your total 
population as well as number of gnomes who are 
currently idle. The right side of this window 
shows how many gnomes have been selected for 
The Status tab lists all gnomes and their 
current status. Clicking on the name of a gnome 
will bring up detailed information about that 
gnome. Likewise, clicking on a job will bring up 
The Assign tab is where you can assign each 
The Professions tab is where you can alter and 
create new Professions. Each gnome is 
assigned a profession which outlines what jobs 
they are allowed to perform. Each job has a 
skill that is associated with it. For example, 
only gnomes with a profession that has Mining 
selected will be allowed to carry out any Mining 
The Military window shows information about 
your Squads and their current assignments. 
More detailed information about Squads is 
The Events window provides of log of various 
events that can be viewed by date. There is 
also a detailed breakdown of each battle in the 
Stock items on this floor next if possible
A pine crate. Used to store various items. 